# Predicting Median Household Income <br/>STAT  471 Final Project<br/>Arnold Jia and Kevin Chen<br/>December 19, 2021
## Executive Summary
**Problem:** Median household income is a canonical measure of well-being in the United States. Not only is it indicative of one's economic status, it is closely tied to other demographic and sociopolitical factors, from educational attainment to health. As shown in a [NCBI study](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4866586), median household income was associated with longer life expectancy throughout the income distribution. The gap in longevity between the wealthiest 1% and the poorest 1% of individuals was 14.6 years for men and 10.1 years for women. Furthermore, this study also found that inequality in life expectancy has only increased throughout the years. Between 2001 and 2014, life expectancy for the top 5% increased by 2.34 years for men and 2.91 years for women; but in the bottom 5%, life expectancy only increased by 0.32 years for men and 0.04 years for women. This means that median household income is closely, and statistically significantly, tied to health, and is growing evermore important. Beyond health, median household income is also closely tied to measures of happiness and other standards of living, making it a valuable measure to explore in-depth. 


**Data:** The data we use includes information about median household income, housing, education, ethnicity, etc. for 3,142 counties in the United States. See **Data Description** for an in-depth description of all of the features. This data was collected from the American Community Survey in 2019, which was conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau to better understand communities across the country.


**Analysis:** After cleaning the data and splitting it into training and testing sets, our first step was to explore various relationships in the data to obtain a preliminary sense of which features are important and how they impact household income. Then, we fit four regression methods (ordinary-least-squares regression, ridge regression, lasso regression, and elastic net regresion) and three tree-based methods (regression tree, random forest, and boosted model). With each method, we tune parameters when necessary to best minimize expected test error. In the end, we test all models on the test dataset.


**Conclusions:** The boosted model had the best performance, with an RMSE of $4,922. Ultimately, our models were effective in explaining the variance in median household income, and there was significant overlap in which features were selected as important. The main sets of features that were important in predicting median household income across all models were (1) technology ownership (computers, smartphones, broadband internet), (2) economic factors (unemployment, lack of insurance), and (3) education (having a bachelor's degree or being a high-school graduate). For relevant stakeholders, we believe that analysis of these aforementioned features will be insightful into improving well-being across the country, especially in struggling communities. Ultimately, investing in access to technology, infrastructure, and education is tremendously important in improving median household income. 
